<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingley. He had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was paid, she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he suddenly addressed her with:</p>
			<p>“I hope <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingley will like it Lizzy.”</p>
			<p>“We are not in a way to know <em>what</em> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingley likes,” said her mother resentfully, “since we are not to visit.”</p>
			<p>“But you forget, mama,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the assemblies, and that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Long has promised to introduce him.”</p>
			<p>“I do not believe <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Long will do any such thing. She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her.”</p>
			<p>“No more have I,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennet; “and I am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bennet deigned not to make any reply; but unable to contain herself, began scolding one of her daughters.</p>
			<p>“Don’t keep coughing so, Kitty, for heaven’s sake! Have a little compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”</p>
			<p>“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times them ill.”</p>
			<p>“I do not cough for my own amusement,” replied Kitty fretfully.</p>
			<p>“When is your next ball to be, Lizzy?”</p>
			<p>“Tomorrow fortnight.”</p>
			<p>“Aye, so it is,” cried her mother, “and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Long does not come back till the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him herself.”</p>
			<p>“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingley to <em>her</em>.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with him myself; how can you be so teasing?”</p>
			<p>“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s acquaintance is certainly very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if <em>we</em> do not venture, somebody else will; and after all, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will take it on myself.”</p>
			<p>The girls stared at their father. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bennet said only, “Nonsense, nonsense!”</p>
			<p>“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried he. “Do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you <em>there</em>. What say you, Mary? for you are a young lady of deep reflection I know, and read great books, and make extracts.”</p>
			<p>Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.</p>
			<p>“While Mary is adjusting her ideas,” he continued, “let us return to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingley.”</p>
			<p>“I am sick of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingley,” cried his wife.</p>
			<p>“I am sorry to hear <em>that</em>; but why did not you tell me so before? If I had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now.”</p>
			<p>The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while.</p>
			<p>“How good it was in you, my dear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennet! But I knew I should persuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a word about it till now.”</p>
			<p>“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennet; and, as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.</p>
			<p>“What an excellent father you have, girls,” said she, when the door was shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness; or me either, for that matter. At our time of life, it is not so pleasant I can tell you, to be making new acquaintance every day; but for your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you <em>are</em> the youngest, I dare say <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bingley will dance with you at the next ball.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said Lydia stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I <em>am</em> the youngest, I’m the tallest.”</p>
			<p>The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would return <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennet’s visit, and determining when they should ask him to dinner.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
